# Project Proposal

Intensifying wildfires have challenged Californians to rethink their connection to place, with some people displaced by home-destroying fires choosing to rebuild where they lived, while others opt (or are forced) to move on to places with more accessible housing.  Debates on whether to stay or retreat often focus on homeowners and landlords, assuming that insurance money is available to aid in rebuilding.  Less considered is the plight of the renter who, having lost their residence to fire, subsequently faces the triple burden of being displaced, without any equity in the form of land or insurance coverage, and the prospect of an _even more_ competitive rental market supercharged by the removal of many units.  In response to this final issue, the Governor of California has instituted emergency bans on rent increases in the hopes of stopping landlords price-gouging.

We propose to map how rents have responded to catastrophic wildfires in Napa and Sonoma Counties in California (Tubbs 2017, Valley 2015, Glass 2020, LNU 2020). Both counties were subject to California’s emergency bans on rent gouging in 2017 and 2020. In doing so, we hope to answer two main questions:
To what extent do wildfires cause rent increases in their surrounding areas?
How effective are emergency bans on price increases at maintaining pre-fire rents?

To complete this analysis, we will rely on two main categories of data: [historical rent prices](https://www.zillow.com/research/data/) and [fire footprints](https://data.ca.gov/dataset/california-fire-perimeters-all1), taken from Zillow and California Natural Resources Agency respectively. We hope to measure whether average changes to rent exceeded the bans’ limits. To visualize our findings, we will create a map overlaying percentage changes in rent in the areas surrounding wildfire footprints. 

Wildfires and the cost of housing are perhaps the two most pressing issues facing Californians today and are typically considered separately.  Yet, as more and more of the state burns, they may become ever more intertwined.  Our research has the potential to influence not only what we know about the impacts of wildfire, but how we think about housing policy as well.  If bans on rent gouging have not been effective, it is incumbent on policymakers to find other avenues for protecting tenants displaced by fires.
